welcome to maths master org let's have a
look at doing calculations with mixed
numbers and fractions mixed number and
frenching calculations look like this as
you can see you can be adding
subtracting timesing or dividing them
and you may have a mixed number for
example x by a fraction or if you look
at the bottom example here you may
actually have two mixed numbers together
in the same calculation so 8 and 2/3 add
4 and 1/8 what this lesson is about is
focusing on how we would go about
answering these questions how would we
actually do these calculations before
you can do calculations with mixed
numbers and fractions you have to be
really good at doing two other things
you have to be able to convert a mixed
number to an improper fraction you need
to be really good at that and secondly
you need to be able to add subtract
multiply and divide fractions now
there's a lot of work there but you've
really got to be really good at doing
all those 4 operations on fractions
before you move on to learning how to do
calculations with mixed numbers and
fractions so make sure that you're okay
at those two things before you go on
with this lesson whilst all these mixed
number and fractions questions look
different they're actually all answered
using a very very similar process it's
actually the same each time it's a
two-step process and it relates back to
those two things that you've got to be
able to do before you can go on and do
these calculations so the first thing
you should do when you get a mixed
number and fracturing calculation the
first thing you should do is convert all
of the mixed numbers into improper
fractions so you rewrite the sum out but
rather than the mixed numbers you
convert all of them into improper
fractions the
second thing you do then is now that
you've got the Sun written out just in
fraction form you then go on and add
subtract multiply divide the fractions
as you normally would so whatever you
have to do if it's an addition some you
go and add the fractions and so on let's
have a look at a few examples now to see
if we can get the hang of it so - Anna
10th turn 1/10 times by 1/3 the first
thing you do is all of the mixed numbers
you turn into improper fractions so 2
and 1/10 is 20 one tenth as an improper
fraction so now we've rewritten the sum
out just using fractions and then we go
on and multiply these two fractions as
we normally would so multiplying
fractions you do a numerator times
numerator 21 times 1 is 21 and you do
denominator times denominator 10 times 3
is 30 so that a nominator of the answer
is 30 so our answer to this question is
21 thirtieths and of course you could go
on to simplify that fraction if you
wanted to let's have a look at a
division of some now so we'll do 2 and
1/4 divided by one and five-eighths
first step convert all the mixed numbers
into improper fractions so 2 and 1/4 is
nine quarters as an improper fraction 1
and 5/8 is 13 eighths
as an improper fraction okay now we've
got to this point we adjust do the
division sum on the fractions as we're
familiar with so divide fractions can
you remember the rule you have to take
the second fraction and take its
reciprocal that means turn the fraction
upside down so 13:8 become 8 13 and we
change the divide sign to a times so now
we'll go on and do nine
waters times 8 13 9 times 8 in the
numerator gives us 72 for the numerator
of our answer 4 times 13 gives us a
denominator of 52 as an answer so the
answer to our original question 2 and
1/4 divided by 105 8 is 72 over 52 and
naturally you could simplify that if you
needed to you could write that fraction
in its simplest form or you could
convert the answer to a mixed number if
that's what the question asks you to do
here's an example of an addition some
with a mixed number and a proper
fraction same rules still apply first
step is convert all the mixed numbers to
improper fractions so 1 and 3/5 becomes
8 fifths it's an improper fraction but
it's the same size that's 103 fifths and
then we go on and simply add the pairs
of fractions as we normally would so
eight fifths add seven tenths well we
have to make the denominators the same
so the denominator of eight fifths and
7/10 we have to make the denominators
the same and we use equivalent fractions
to do that so I'll change eight fifths
into sixteen tenths sixteen tenths is
exactly the same size as eight fifths
we're just using that because it's now
the denominators are the same sixteen
tenths add seven tenths we can do that
nice and easily
that gives us twenty three tenths all
together so that's the answer to our
original question and once again you
could go on and write that as a mixed
number if the question asked you to but
that's the answer let's finish up with a
subtraction so we'll do 3 and 1/10
subtract one and two fifths first step
exactly the same again convert all the
mixed numbers to improper fractions so 3
and 1/10
is the same as 31 tenths and one and two
fifths is the same as seven fifths so
now we'll go on and do 31 tenths
subtract seven fifths we need to make
the denominators the same I'll do that
by using an equivalent fraction to 7/5
so we use fourteen tenths same size as
seven fifths but it has the benefit that
we have now made the denominators the
same and we can go on and do thirty-one
tenths subtract 14 tenths now which
gives us 17 tenths all together and
naturally you could go on and convert
that to a mixed number if you wanted
that's one in seven tenths if that's the
format that the question asked you that
it wanted the answer in but nonetheless
17 tenths is the answer that was
calculations with mixed numbers and
fractions if you want to see some all
great maths videos please visit maths
master dot-org